Add a specification document (#275)
eiriktsarpalis/PolyType: docs/specification.md

# Type Shape Derivation Specification

This document provides a comprehensive specification for how .NET types are mapped to PolyType shapes. Both built-in shape providers (source generator and reflection provider) implement identical derivation logic that maps arbitrary .NET types into type shapes of different kinds.

## Overview

PolyType categorizes .NET types into eight distinct shape kinds, each represented by a specific interface:

> - **Object** - `IObjectTypeShape` for general object types with properties and constructors  

Reviewer: @copilot please link each type name to the corresponding API documentation section using the relevant docfx syntax.

- **Enumerable** - `IEnumerableTypeShape` for collection types implementing `IEnumerable<T>`
- **Dictionary** - `IDictionaryTypeShape` for key-value collection types
- **Enum** - `IEnumTypeShape` for enumeration types
- **Optional** - `IOptionalTypeShape` for nullable value types and F# options
- **Surrogate** - `ISurrogateTypeShape` for types with custom marshaling

> - **Union** - `IUnionTypeShape` for discriminated union types

Reviewer: @copilot 
```suggestion
- **Union** - `IUnionTypeShape` for polymorphic type hierarchies or discriminated union types.
```

- **Function** - `IFunctionTypeShape` for delegate and F# function types

## Derivation Algorithm

Type shape derivation follows a priority-based algorithm that checks conditions in the following order:

### 1. Surrogate Types (Highest Priority)

**Condition**: A type is mapped to `ISurrogateTypeShape` when a custom marshaler is explicitly configured.

**Implementation Details**:
- Requires an `IMarshaler<T, TSurrogate>` implementation
- The marshaler provides bidirectional mapping between the original type and surrogate type

> - Configured via the `GenerateShape` attribute's `Marshaler` parameter or type extensions

Reviewer: @copilot 
```suggestion
- Configured via the `GenerateShape`, `TypeShapeAttribute`, or `TypeShapeExtension` attributes' `Marshaler` parameter.
```

> - Configured via the <xref:PolyType.GenerateShapeAttribute> attribute's `Marshaler` parameter or type extensions

Reviewer: Include mention of TypeShapeAttribute and TypeShapeExtensionsAttribute explicitly.

- Takes precedence over all other shape kinds

> **Examples**:

Reviewer: Remove all examples please.

- `type.IsEnum` returns `true`

**Implementation Details**:
- Includes the underlying numeric type (byte, int, long, etc.)
- Provides access to all enum members and their values
- Supports custom enum member naming through overridable methods

**Examples**:
```csharp
public enum Color { Red = 1, Green = 2, Blue = 3 }
public enum FileAccess : byte { Read = 1, Write = 2, ReadWrite = 3 }
```

### 3. Optional Types

**Condition**: A type is mapped to <xref:PolyType.Abstractions.IOptionalTypeShape> when:
- It is @System.Nullable`1 (e.g., `int?`, `DateTime?`)
- It is an F# option type with appropriate metadata

**Implementation Details**:
- For nullable value types: @System.Nullable.GetUnderlyingType* returns non-null
- For F# options: detected via F# reflection helpers
- Provides access to the element type and construction/deconstruction methods

**Examples**:
```csharp
int? nullableInt;           // Maps to IOptionalTypeShape<int?, int>
DateTime? nullableDate;     // Maps to IOptionalTypeShape<DateTime?, DateTime>
// F# option<'T> types are also supported
```

### 4. Function Types

**Condition**: A type is mapped to <xref:PolyType.Abstractions.IFunctionTypeShape> when:

> - @System.Delegate.IsAssignableFrom* returns `true`

Reviewer: Too specific, you can simply say that all delegate types map to this shape.

- This includes @System.Func`1, @System.Action, and custom delegate types

> **Implementation Details**:

Reviewer: Remove entire section, since it doesn't pertain to shape mapping.

- Provides access to parameter shapes and return type
- Supports both creation and invocation of delegate instances
- Handles F# function types through specialized detection

> **Examples**:

Reviewer: Remove examples everywhere please.

```csharp
Func<int, string>           // Maps to IFunctionTypeShape
Action<string, int>         // Maps to IFunctionTypeShape  
Predicate<Person>          // Maps to IFunctionTypeShape
MyCustomDelegate           // Maps to IFunctionTypeShape
```

### 5. Union Types

> **Condition**: A type is mapped to <xref:PolyType.Abstractions.IUnionTypeShape> when (requires `allowUnionShapes = true`):

Reviewer: `allowUnionShapes = true` is implementation detail, remove this bullet.

- It has F# discriminated union metadata (detected via `FSharpReflectionHelpers`)
- It has <xref:PolyType.DerivedTypeShapeAttribute> attributes declaring union cases
- It has WCF @System.Runtime.Serialization.DataContractAttribute with @System.Runtime.Serialization.KnownTypeAttribute attributes

**Implementation Details**:
- Provides access to all union cases/derived types
- Each case has a unique identifier (name and optional numeric tag)
- Supports both open and closed union hierarchies

**Examples**:
```csharp
// Explicit union with DerivedTypeShape attributes
[DerivedTypeShape<Dog>]
[DerivedTypeShape<Cat>]  
public abstract partial record Animal;

// WCF-style unions
[DataContract]
[KnownType(typeof(Circle))]
[KnownType(typeof(Rectangle))]
public abstract class Shape { }
```

### 6. Dictionary Types

**Condition**: A type is mapped to <xref:PolyType.Abstractions.IDictionaryTypeShape> when it implements (checked in priority order):
- @System.Collections.Generic.IDictionary`2
- @System.Collections.Generic.IReadOnlyDictionary`2
- Non-generic @System.Collections.IDictionary

> **Implementation Details**:

Reviewer: Unify with previous list.

- Takes precedence over @System.Collections.Generic.IEnumerable`1 since dictionaries also implement enumerable
- For generic dictionaries: provides strongly-typed key and value types
- For non-generic @System.Collections.IDictionary: uses `object` for both key and value types

> - Supports construction via collection constructors or factory methods

Reviewer: Remove this bullet.

> **Examples**:

Reviewer: Convert this to a table instead.
